good evening my name is Julie Benson
from Leeds I would like to ask the panel
why a mic in Australia when people were
flying back in before they closed the
borders people were made to isolate into
a hotel for two weeks
and weren't allowed to go home until
they were tested and cleared I would
like to understand why we're not taking
those kind of measures in this country
why we're allowing people to fly in and
not isolating them the same in a hotel
thank you and week after week while we
be doing this new version of Christian
this question has come up which is what
I want to take it's not gene I'm gonna
start with you that this is this is
happening in Scotland as well as the
rest of the UK is that gonna change are
we just gonna let people come in
willy-nilly well we can't make that
decision here in Scotland because the
decision about our ports whether they're
airports of course it's not divil what
would you like to happen what overview
my view is that what the questioner has
just asked is absolutely right and so we
will be wanting the UK government a very
serious consideration to stopping the
inward transmission of the virus
particularly given the fact that the
people across Scotland and indeed across
the UK have worked so hard to
successfully suppress it to this point
it seems to me through hard day -
they're not very serious consideration
to what we do about international travel
who's into and out of the UK and is
there something you've been pushing for
as the Scottish government it's
something that we have raised and then
the continuing discussions as we
collectively look across the four
nations about what measures might we
take to easel order in any respect that
will be one of the areas that we will
want to pursue with the UK government
and with the prime minister in the
discussions that we have in an illicit
people as I said people have been asking
this time and time again I just can't
seem to understand this because I'm not
sure I can either why when so many other
countries Australia being one but a lot
of other countries put people into
quarantine if they come into
country we're not doing that would you
like to see that change well I think
there have been very serious concerns
around this and what we've been seeing
to government is that it needs to be
open around its reasoning on this
question I mean so it's not to change
but you just like to understand but we
need to understand why that decision has
been taken because you're right practice
in other countries has been different
actually if we look at people who've
been coming into the country I've been
dealing with huge numbers of Brits who
are all around the world who would
desperately love to be back here and
you're being brought back at a much
slower rate and then if they were
another country's national but you know
hopefully grant might be able to
enlighten us a little bit more because I
accept that on the one hand you know for
example some of the measures that were
put in place and other nations haven't
necessarily worked for example you know
temperature measurements as people come
in because you know that's that's not
robust obviously but I think we do need
to look at the fact that potentially
there have been people coming into the
country who might have been taking the
virus with them I suppose that the
problem is this is then conjoined with
that testing issue I'm sorry to bring it
back to that I know we've just been
talking about it but you know if people
who had come back into the country had
then been able to quickly access a test
for themselves to know what the
situation was then you know we could
have dealt with this more robustly I
think this is more of an issue because
we don't yet have that community testing
in the UK to the extent that applies in
many other countries the Henry d has
tweeted in we're all on lockdown so why
not ban people coming into this country
without being tested and they should
spend 14 days in quarantine
I mean interest in the Australia New
Zealand we're introducing this policy
when when we were going to the
Cheltenham races I mean what's your is
this gonna change
grant yeah different countries are in
different parts of the or different
moments in this pandemic at different
times but whilst it's an endemic in this
country and in other words prevalent
amongst population is not it makes no
great difference to the overall figures
according to the scientists and medical
experts however that changes as we get a
grip of those numbers and then become
something that is actually very valuable
to do because to use the classic
flattening of the
it's starting to come down there is the
important point of course the salaries
of raises of returning foreign British
nationals who are abroad here but is
absolutely true to say I think if the
British people themselves are being
asked to continue with social distancing
measures then it's quite right to expect
people coming into the country would be
would have the same measures applied to
them so it's actually something that
very much as we get to the smaller
numbers and not wanting to see a repeat
of the infection something very much as
a live discussion Paul I think this is
obvious we should be doing it I hope
with the capacity for testing that we
would have in place and with the
recognition of the importance of this in
the coming months we'll introduce this
because this isn't going to go away in a
hurry we need it and you do other things
as well you'd require people coming into
the country to download the NHS app for
the tracking tracing purposes as well so
it's got to be the same rule for
everybody so I don't entirely agree with
the question it's got to be the same
thing for everybody I mean look I think
the lesson of all of this is treat the
public like adults and explain to them
exactly why you're doing these first
things and I think you know otherwise
people sit at home and they go hold on
like there's a lone Walker in Derbyshire
and they've got a drone following them
and barking at them to go back home when
you've got like thousands of people
going through Heathrow Airport and you
know Grant says the scientists tell us
at the moment that it's not
statistically significant well then the
lone Walker's not a statistically
significant either and and I think you
know I I think we passed through the
phase of the crisis where you know
because people are very afraid
understanding for themselves and their
loved ones they'll just take the word of
the government and the Prime Minister
you know it stands there as it did again
today and he's you know very impressive
and optimistic when he does that but I
think we're coming to the end of just
taking the kind of ministerial diktat
people are getting their information
from all over the world about how
different countries are dealing with
this how different opinions on how it
should be done and I think we're moving
into a phase where actually it's in the
government's interest to open this up
explained or left thinking and and carry
people with them try and carry the
opposition with them try go the media
with them
but above all trying currently the
public and whether I was a newspaper
editor or indeed as a former politician
I always found if you treated the public
I got out so they responded like adults
I think George is so right there and we
are not sure we've been treating the
public society as grown-ups I mean we've
had these sort of slightly weaselly
explanations about what we should be
doing and you know capacity and all of
these sorts of things we are in a crisis
we know it's difficult we need for
leadership you need to actually be seen
to take on the problems and explain them
and that I think that's the way through
I add to that also we have to act better
as a community as well we have to work
together to get this through but we need
proper leadership proper transparency
proper communication so that we can get
through that with a better community
[Music]
you